README.md, before:

# QuasiFlow

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow-21.04.1-yellowgreen)](https://www.nextflow.io)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-singularity-brightgreen)](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-docker-orange)](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-conda-yellowgreen)](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)

[![Twitter Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/alfred_ug.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/alfred_ug) 

## Introduction

QuasiFlow is a nextflow pipeline for reproducible analysis of NGS-based HIVDR testing data across different computing environments. The pipeline takes raw sequence reads in FASTQ format as input, performs quality control, mapping of reads to a reference genome, variant calling, querying the database for detection of HIV drug resistance mutations, and ultimately generates a user-friendly report in PDF and HTML format. QuasiFlow is publicly available at https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow. 

## Installation

QuasiFlow requires **nextflow** (version 21.04.3 or higher) and any of **conda**/**singularity**/**docker**. In this walk through, we shall demonstrate the use of `conda` which is more readily available to most users.

The first option is to install the pipeline using nextflow, it will be installed in the `$HOME` directory under the `.nextflow` sub-directory. Confirm that installation was successful by printing out the help message.

```bash
nextflow pull AlfredUg/QuasiFlow
nextflow run ~/.nextflow/assets/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow --help
```

Alternatively, simply clone the pipeline repository into a desired directory. Similarly, confirm that installation was successful by printing out the help message.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow.git
nextflow run QuasiFlow --help
```

## Usage

The pipeline takes as input paired-end illumina data in `FASTQ` format. Let's download some test data from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) using `wget` command and decompress it using the `gunzip` command. This is paired-end data from a single sample of bioProject PRJDB3502.

```bash
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/DRR030/DRR030218/DRR030218_1.fastq.gz 
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/DRR030/DRR030218/DRR030218_2.fastq.gz 
```

```bash
gunzip DRR030218*.gz
```
Run QuasiFlow on a test dataset with default parameters under the `conda` profile. This option does not require prior installation since it automatically pulls the pipeline from `main` branch of the pipeline repository on github. In addition, it installs all the dependancies in a `conda` environment. If you already installed the pipeline using the procedure above, see next options.

```bash
nextflow run AlfredUg/QuasiFlow -r main --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

If you pulled/installed the pipeline using nextflow, simply point to the installation path as follows;
```bash
nextflow run ~/.nextflow/assets/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

Similarly, if you already cloned the pipeline repository, simply point to the installation path as follows;
```bash
nextflow run path/to/QuasiFlow --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

### Profiles

Quasiflow can be run under different computing environments, simply choose an appropriate profile via the `-profile` argument. Could take any of the following `-profile conda, singularity, docker`. Custom profiles can be added to the `conf` directory using any of the available profiles as a template.

#### Pipeline 

**Outputs Quality control**

* `raw_reads_multiqc_report.html`: Aggregated quality control data and visualisations - one file for entire dataset

**Variants and drug resistance outputs**

* `consensus*.fasta`: `FASTA` files of consensus sequences - one per sample
* `consensus*.json`: `JSON` files of detailed HIV drug resistance analysis - one per sample
* `dr_report*.csv`: `CSV` files of drug resistance mutations at different mutational frequencies - one per sample
* `filtered*.fastq`: `FASTQ` files of drug resistance mutations at different mutational frequencies - one per sample
* `mutation_report*.aavf`: `AAVF` files of amino acid variant calls - one per sample
* `hivdr*.html`: `HTML` Final drug resistance report - one per sample

**Pipeline information output**

* `QuasiFlow_DAG.html`: Graphical representation of the pipeline's processes/operators and channels between them.
* `QuasiFlow_report.html`: Overall start and completion time, CPU and memory usage.
* `QuasiFlow_timeline.html`: Timeline for all the processes executed in the pipeline.

Note: Nextflow throws the following warning on MacOS, `WARN: Task runtime metrics are not reported when using macOS without a container engine`. 

## Parameters

### HyDRA parameters

Mandatory parameters

* `--reads`: Path to input data (must be surrounded with quotes)

Optional parameters

* `--reporting_threshold`: Minimum mutation frequency percent to report.

* `--consensus_pct`: Minimum percentage a base needs to be incorporated into the consensus sequence.

* `--min_read_qual`: Minimum quality for a position in a read to be masked.	     

* `length_cutoff`: Reads which fall short of the specified length will be filtered out.

* `score_cutoff`: Reads that have a median or mean quality score (depending on the score type specified) less than the score cutoff value will be filtered out.

* `--min_variant_qual`: Minimum quality for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline.

* `--min_dp`: Minimum required read depth for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline.

* `--min_ac`: The minimum required allele count for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline

* `--min_freq`: The minimum required frequency for mutation to be considered in drug resistance report.


### Sierralocal parameters

Optional parameters

* `--xml`: Path to HIVdb ASI2 XML.

* `--apobec-tsv`: Path to tab-delimited (tsv) HIVdb APOBEC DRM file.

* `--comments-tsv`: Path to tab-delimited (tsv) HIVdb comments file.


### Output parameters

Optional parameters

* `--outdir`: Path to directory where results will be saved 

## Dependancies.

Below is the list of tools that are used in the QuasiFlow pipeline. These tools are readliy available and may be installed using `conda` via `bioconda` channel.

+ [fastQC](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc)
+ [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/)
+ [Trim-galore](https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore)
+ [Quasitools](https://phac-nml.github.io/quasitools/)
+ [Sierra-local](https://github.com/PoonLab/sierra-local)
+ R packages (Jsonlite, plyr, dplyr, flexdashboard, rmarkdown, knitr, tinytex), all available in [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/)

## Troubleshooting

Kindly report any issues at https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow/issues.

## License

QuasiFlow is licensed under GNU GPL v3.

## Citation

Ssekagiri A, Jjingo D, Lujumba I, Bbosa N, Bugembe DL, Kateete DP, Jordan IK, Kaleebu P, Ssemwanga D. QuasiFlow: a Nextflow pipeline for analysis of NGS-based HIV-1 drug resistance data. Bioinform Adv. 2022 Nov 28;2(1):vbac089. doi: [10.1093/bioadv/vbac089](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac089/6849543). PMID: 36699347; PMCID: PMC9722223.

Commit message:

Add DSL2 alert to main branch README

README.md, after:

# QuasiFlow

> 🔬 We are currently in the process of converting QuasiFlow to Nextflow DSL2. 
> The DSL2 branch (https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow/tree/dsl2) is under active development and may not be fully stable.
> We appreciate your patience and welcome any feedback! 🙏

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow-21.04.1-yellowgreen)](https://www.nextflow.io)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-singularity-brightgreen)](https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-docker-orange)](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/uses-conda-yellowgreen)](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)

[![Twitter Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/alfred_ug.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/alfred_ug) 

## Introduction

QuasiFlow is a nextflow pipeline for reproducible analysis of NGS-based HIVDR testing data across different computing environments. The pipeline takes raw sequence reads in FASTQ format as input, performs quality control, mapping of reads to a reference genome, variant calling, querying the database for detection of HIV drug resistance mutations, and ultimately generates a user-friendly report in PDF and HTML format. QuasiFlow is publicly available at https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow. 

## Installation

QuasiFlow requires **nextflow** (version 21.04.3 or higher) and any of **conda**/**singularity**/**docker**. In this walk through, we shall demonstrate the use of `conda` which is more readily available to most users.

The first option is to install the pipeline using nextflow, it will be installed in the `$HOME` directory under the `.nextflow` sub-directory. Confirm that installation was successful by printing out the help message.

```bash
nextflow pull AlfredUg/QuasiFlow
nextflow run ~/.nextflow/assets/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow --help
```

Alternatively, simply clone the pipeline repository into a desired directory. Similarly, confirm that installation was successful by printing out the help message.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow.git
nextflow run QuasiFlow --help
```

## Usage

The pipeline takes as input paired-end illumina data in `FASTQ` format. Let's download some test data from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) using `wget` command and decompress it using the `gunzip` command. This is paired-end data from a single sample of bioProject PRJDB3502.

```bash
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/DRR030/DRR030218/DRR030218_1.fastq.gz 
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/DRR030/DRR030218/DRR030218_2.fastq.gz 
```

```bash
gunzip DRR030218*.gz
```
Run QuasiFlow on a test dataset with default parameters under the `conda` profile. This option does not require prior installation since it automatically pulls the pipeline from `main` branch of the pipeline repository on github. In addition, it installs all the dependancies in a `conda` environment. If you already installed the pipeline using the procedure above, see next options.

```bash
nextflow run AlfredUg/QuasiFlow -r main --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

If you pulled/installed the pipeline using nextflow, simply point to the installation path as follows;
```bash
nextflow run ~/.nextflow/assets/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

Similarly, if you already cloned the pipeline repository, simply point to the installation path as follows;
```bash
nextflow run path/to/QuasiFlow --reads "$PWD/*_{1,2}.fastq" -profile conda
```

### Profiles

Quasiflow can be run under different computing environments, simply choose an appropriate profile via the `-profile` argument. Could take any of the following `-profile conda, singularity, docker`. Custom profiles can be added to the `conf` directory using any of the available profiles as a template.

#### Pipeline 

**Outputs Quality control**

* `raw_reads_multiqc_report.html`: Aggregated quality control data and visualisations - one file for entire dataset

**Variants and drug resistance outputs**

* `consensus*.fasta`: `FASTA` files of consensus sequences - one per sample
* `consensus*.json`: `JSON` files of detailed HIV drug resistance analysis - one per sample
* `dr_report*.csv`: `CSV` files of drug resistance mutations at different mutational frequencies - one per sample
* `filtered*.fastq`: `FASTQ` files of drug resistance mutations at different mutational frequencies - one per sample
* `mutation_report*.aavf`: `AAVF` files of amino acid variant calls - one per sample
* `hivdr*.html`: `HTML` Final drug resistance report - one per sample

**Pipeline information output**

* `QuasiFlow_DAG.html`: Graphical representation of the pipeline's processes/operators and channels between them.
* `QuasiFlow_report.html`: Overall start and completion time, CPU and memory usage.
* `QuasiFlow_timeline.html`: Timeline for all the processes executed in the pipeline.

Note: Nextflow throws the following warning on MacOS, `WARN: Task runtime metrics are not reported when using macOS without a container engine`. 

## Parameters

### HyDRA parameters

Mandatory parameters

* `--reads`: Path to input data (must be surrounded with quotes)

Optional parameters

* `--reporting_threshold`: Minimum mutation frequency percent to report.

* `--consensus_pct`: Minimum percentage a base needs to be incorporated into the consensus sequence.

* `--min_read_qual`: Minimum quality for a position in a read to be masked.	     

* `length_cutoff`: Reads which fall short of the specified length will be filtered out.

* `score_cutoff`: Reads that have a median or mean quality score (depending on the score type specified) less than the score cutoff value will be filtered out.

* `--min_variant_qual`: Minimum quality for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline.

* `--min_dp`: Minimum required read depth for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline.

* `--min_ac`: The minimum required allele count for variant to be considered later on in the pipeline

* `--min_freq`: The minimum required frequency for mutation to be considered in drug resistance report.


### Sierralocal parameters

Optional parameters

* `--xml`: Path to HIVdb ASI2 XML.

* `--apobec-tsv`: Path to tab-delimited (tsv) HIVdb APOBEC DRM file.

* `--comments-tsv`: Path to tab-delimited (tsv) HIVdb comments file.


### Output parameters

Optional parameters

* `--outdir`: Path to directory where results will be saved 

## Dependancies.

Below is the list of tools that are used in the QuasiFlow pipeline. These tools are readliy available and may be installed using `conda` via `bioconda` channel.

+ [fastQC](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc)
+ [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/)
+ [Trim-galore](https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore)
+ [Quasitools](https://phac-nml.github.io/quasitools/)
+ [Sierra-local](https://github.com/PoonLab/sierra-local)
+ R packages (Jsonlite, plyr, dplyr, flexdashboard, rmarkdown, knitr, tinytex), all available in [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/)

## Troubleshooting

Kindly report any issues at https://github.com/AlfredUg/QuasiFlow/issues.

## License

QuasiFlow is licensed under GNU GPL v3.

## Citation

Ssekagiri A, Jjingo D, Lujumba I, Bbosa N, Bugembe DL, Kateete DP, Jordan IK, Kaleebu P, Ssemwanga D. QuasiFlow: a Nextflow pipeline for analysis of NGS-based HIV-1 drug resistance data. Bioinform Adv. 2022 Nov 28;2(1):vbac089. doi: [10.1093/bioadv/vbac089](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac089/6849543). PMID: 36699347; PMCID: PMC9722223.
